
===== PAGE 1 =====
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR PLANNING, DESIGNING AND CONSTRUCTING FIXED OFFSHORE PLATFORMS—WORKING STRESS DESIGN
55
smooth to a radius greater than or equal to half the branch
thickness. Final grinding marks should be transverse to the
weld axis and the entire ﬁnished proﬁle should pass magnetic
particle inspection.
5.5
STRESS CONCENTRATION FACTORS
The X and X´ curves should be used with hot spot stress
ranges based on suitable stress concentration factors. Stress
concentration factors may be derived from ﬁnite element
analyses, model tests or empirical equations based on such
methods.
For joints not meeting the requirements of Section 4.3.1,
e.g., connections in which load transfer is accomplished by
overlap (Section 4.3.2), or by gusset plates, ring stiffeners,
etc. (Section 4.3.5), a minimum stress concentration factor
of 6.0 should be used in the brace member, in lieu of addi-
tional analysis. Where the chord and/or other joint rein-
forcement are not designed to develop the full static
capacity of the members joined, these elements should also
be checked separately.
6
Foundation Design
The recommended criteria of Section 6.1 through Section
6.11 are devoted to pile foundations, and more speciﬁcally to
steel cylindrical (pipe) pile foundations. The recommended
criteria of Section 6.12 through Section 6.17 are devoted to
shallow foundations.
6.1
GENERAL
The foundation should be designed to carry static, cyclic
and transient loads without excessive deformations or vibra-
tions in the platform. Special attention should be given to the
effects of cyclic and transient loading on the strength of the
supporting soils as well as on the structural response of piles.
Guidance provided in Sections 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5 is based upon
static, monotonic loadings. Furthermore, this guidance does
not necessarily apply to so called problem soils such as car-
bonate material or volcanic sands or highly sensitive clays.
The possibility of movement of the seaﬂoor against the foun-
dation members should be investigated and the forces caused
by such movements, if anticipated, should be considered in
the design.
6.2
PILE FOUNDATIONS
Types of pile foundations used to support offshore struc-
tures are as follows:
6.2.1
Driven Piles
Open ended piles are commonly used in foundations for
offshore platforms. These piles are usually driven into the
sea-ﬂoor with impact hammers which use steam, diesel fuel,
or hydraulic power as the source of energy. The pile wall
thickness should be adequate to resist axial and lateral loads
as well as the stresses during pile driving. It is possible to pre-
dict approximately the stresses during pile driving using the
principles of one-dimensional elastic stress wave transmis-
sion by carefully selecting the parameters that govern the
behavior of soil, pile, cushions, capblock and hammer. For a
more detailed study of these principles, refer to E.A.L.
Smith’s paper, “Pile Driving Analysis by the Wave Equation,”
Transactions ASCE, Vol. 127, 1962, Part 1, Paper No. 3306,
pp, 1145–1193. The above approach may also be used to
optimize the pile hammer cushion and capblock with the aid
of computer analyses (commonly known as the Wave Equa-
tion Analyses). The design penetration of driven piles should
be determined in accordance with the principles outlined in
Sections 6.3 through 6.7 and 6.9 rather than upon any correla-
tion of pile capacity with the number of blows required to
drive the pile a certain distance into the seaﬂoor.
When a pile refuses before it reaches design penetration,
one or more of the following actions can be taken:
a. Review of hammer performance. A review of all aspects of
hammer performance, possibly with the aid of hammer and
pile head instrumentation, may identify problems which can
be solved by improved hammer operation and maintenance,
or by the use of a more powerful hammer.
b. Reevaluation of design penetration. Reconsideration of
loads, deformations and required capacities, of both individ-
ual piles and other foundation elements, and the foundation as
a whole, may identify reserve capacity available. An interpre-
tation of driving records in conjunction with instrumentation
mentioned above may allow design soil parameters or stratiﬁ-
cation to be revised and pile capacity to be increased.
c. Modiﬁcations to piling procedures, usually the last course
of action, may include one of the following:
•
Plug Removal. The soil plug inside the pile is removed
by jetting and air lifting or by drilling to reduce pile
driving resistance. If plug removal results in inadequate
pile capacities, the removed soil plug should be replaced
by a gravel grout or concrete plug having sufﬁcient load-
carrying capacity to replace that of the removed soil
plug. Attention should be paid to plug/pile load transfer
characteristics. Plug removal may not be effective in
some circumstances particularly in cohesive soils.
•
Soil Removal Below Pile Tip. Soil below the pile tip is
removed either by drilling an undersized hole or jetting
equipment is lowered through the pile which acts as the
casing pipe for the operation. The effect on pile capac-
ity of drilling an undersized hole is unpredictable unless
there has been previous experience under similar condi-
tions. Jetting below the pile tip should in general be
avoided because of the unpredictability of the results.

===== PAGE 2 =====
56
API  RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 2A-WSD
•
Two-State Driven Piles. A ﬁrst stage or outer pile is
driven to a predetermined depth, the soil plug is
removed, and a second stage or inner pile is driven
inside the ﬁrst stage pile. The annulus between the two
piles is grouted to permit load transfer and develop
composite action.
•
Drilled and grouted insert piles as described in 6.2.2(b)
below.
6.2.2
Drilled and Grouted Piles
Drilled and grouted piles can be used in soils which will
hold an open hole with or without drilling mud. Load transfer
between grout and pile should be designed in accordance
with Sections 7.4.2, 7.4.3, and 7.4.4. There are two types of
drilled and grouted piles, as follows:
a. Single-Stage. For the single-staged, drilled and grouted
pile, an oversized hole is drilled to the required penetration, a
pile is lowered into the hole and the annulus between the pile
and the soil is grouted. This type pile can be installed only in
soils which will hold an open hole to the surface. As an alter-
native method, the pile with expendable cutting tools attached
to the tip can be used as part of the drill stem to avoid the time
required to remove the drill bit and insert a pile.
b. Two-Stage. The two-staged, drilled and grouted pile con-
sists of two concentrically placed piles grouted to become a
composite section. A pile is driven to a penetration which has
been determined to be achievable with the available equip-
ment and below which an open hole can be maintained. This
outer pile becomes the casing for the next operation which is
to drill through it to the required penetration for the inner or
“insert” pile. The insert pile is then lowered into the drilled
hole and the annuli between the insert pile and the soil an
between the two piles are grouted. Under certain oil condi-
tions, the drilled hole is stopped above required penetration,
and the insert pile is driven to required penetration. The diam-
eter of the drilled hole should be at least 6 inches (150 mm)
larger than the pile diameter.
6.2.3
Belled Piles
Bells may be constructed at the tip of piles to give increased
bearing and uplift capacity through direct bearing on the soil.
Drilling of the bell is carried out through the pile by under-
reaming with an expander tool. A pilot hole may be drilled
below the bell to act as a sump for unrecoverable cuttings. The
bell and pile are ﬁlled with concrete to a height sufﬁcient to
develop necessary load transfer between the bell and the pile.
Bells are connected to the pile to transfer full uplift and bear-
ing loads using steel reinforcing such as structural members
with adequate shear lugs, deformed reinforcement bars or pre-
stressed tendons. Load transfer into the concrete should be
designed in accordance with ACI 318. The steel reinforcing
should be enclosed for their full length below the pile with
spiral reinforcement meeting the requirements of ACI 318.
Load transfer between the concrete and the pile should be
designed in accordance with Sections 7.4.2, 7.4.3, and 7.4.4.
6.3
PILE DESIGN
6.3.1
Foundation Size
When sizing a pile foundation, the following items should
be considered: diameter, penetration, wall thickness, type of
tip, spacing, number of piles, geometry, location, mudline
restraint, material strength, installation method, and other
parameters as may be considered appropriate.
6.3.2
Foundation Response
A number of different analysis procedures may be utilized
to determine the requirements of a foundation. At a mini-
mum, the procedure used should properly stimulate the non-
linear response behavior of the soil and assure load-deﬂection
compatibility between the structure and the pile-soil system.
6.3.3
Deﬂections and Rotations
Deﬂections and rotations of individual piles and the total
foundation system should be checked at all critical locations
which may include pile tops, points of contraﬂecture, mud-
line, etc. Deﬂections and rotations should not exceed service-
ability limits which would render the structure inadequate for
its intended function.
6.3.4
Pile Penetration
The design pile penetration should be sufﬁcient to develop
adequate capacity to resist the maximum computed axial
bearing and pullout loads with an appropriate factor of safety.
The ultimate pile capacities can be computed in accordance
with Sections 6.4 and 6.5 or by other methods which are sup-
ported by reliable comprehensive data. The allowable pile
capacities are determined by dividing the ultimate pile capac-
ities by appropriate factors of safety which should not be less
than the following values:
Factors of
Load Condition
Safety
1. Design environmental conditions with
appropriate drilling loads
1.5
2. Operating environmental conditions during
drilling operations
2.0
3. Design environmental conditions with 
appropriate producing loads
1.5
4. Operating environmental conditions during
producing operations
2.0
5. Design environmental conditions with 
minimum loads (for pullout)
1.5

===== PAGE 3 =====
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR PLANNING, DESIGNING AND CONSTRUCTING FIXED OFFSHORE PLATFORMS—WORKING STRESS DESIGN
57
6.3.5
Alternative Design Methods
The provisions of this recommended practice for sizing the
foundation pile are based on an allowable stress (working
stress) method except for pile penetration per Section 6.3.4.
In this method, the foundation piles should conform to the
requirements of Sections 3.2 and 6.10 in addition to the provi-
sions of Section 6.3. Any alternative method supported by
sound engineering methods and empirical evidence may also
be utilized. Such alternative methods include the limit state
design approach or ultimate strength design of the total foun-
dation system.
6.3.6
Scour
Seabed scour affects both lateral and axial pile perfor-
mance and capacity. Scour prediction remains an uncertain
art. Sediment transport studies may assist in deﬁning scour
design criteria but local experience is the best guide. The
uncertainty on design criteria should be handled by robust
design, or by an operating strategy of monitoring and remedi-
ation as needed. Typical remediation experience is docu-
mented in “Erosion Protection of Production Structures,” by
Posey, C.J., and Sybert, J.H., Proc. 9th Conv. I.A.H.R.,
Dobrovnik, 1961, pp. 1157-1162, and “Scour Repair Meth-
ods in the Southern North Sea,” by Angus, N.M., and Moore,
R.L., OTC 4410, May 1982. Scour design criteria will usually
be a combination of local and global scour.
6.4
PILE CAPACITY FOR AXIAL BEARING LOADS
6.4.1
Ultimate Bearing Capacity
The ultimate bearing capacity of piles, including belled
piles, Qd should be determined by the equation:
Qd = Qf + Qp = fAs + qAp
(6.4.1-1)
where
Qf = skin friction resistance, lb (kN),
Qp = total end bearing, lb (kN),
f = unit skin friction capacity, lb/ft2 (kPa),
As = side surface area of pile, ft2 (m2),
q = unit end bearing capacity, lb/ft2 (kPa),
Ap = gross end area of pile, ft2 (m2).
Total end bearing, Qp, should not exceed the capacity of
the internal plug. In computing pile loading and capacity the
weight of the pile-soil plug system and hydrostatic uplift
should be considered.
In determining the load capacity of a pile, consideration
should be given to the relative deformations between the soil
and the pile as well as the compressibility of the soil pile sys-
tem. Eq. 6.4.1-1 assumes that the maximum skin friction
along the pile and the maximum and bearing are mobilized
simultaneously. However, the ultimate skin friction incre-
ments along the pile are not necessarily directly additive, nor
is the ultimate end bearing necessarily additive to the ultimate
skin friction. In some circumstances this effect may result in
the capacity being less than that given by Eq. 6.4.1-1. In such
cases a more explicit consideration of axial pile performance
effects on pile capacity may be warranted. For additional dis-
cussion of these effects refer to Section 6.6 and ASCE Jour-
nal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division for Load
Transfer for Axially Loaded Piles in Clay, by H.M. Coyle and
L.C. Reese, Vol. 92, No. 1052, March 1966, Murff, J.D., “Pile
Capacity in a Softening Soil,” International Journal for
Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics (1980),
Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 185–189, and Randolph, H.F., “Design
Considerations for Offshore Piles,” Geotechnical Practice in
Offshore Engineering, ASCE, Austin 1983, pp. 422–439.
The foundation conﬁgurations should be based on those
that experience has shown can be installed consistently, prac-
tically and economically under similar conditions with the
pile size and installation equipment being used. Alternatives
for possible remedial action in the event design objectives
cannot be obtained during installation should also be investi-
gated and deﬁned prior to construction.
For the pile-bell system, the factors of safety should be
those given in Section 6.3.4. The allowable skin friction val-
ues on the pile section should be those given in this section
and in Section 6.5. Skin friction on the upper bell surface and
possibly above the bell on the pile should be discounted in
computing skin friction resistance, Qf. The end bearing area
of a pilot hole, if drilled, should be discounted in computing
total bearing area of the bell.
6.4.2
Skin Friction and End Bearing in Cohesive 
Soils
For pipe piles in cohesive soils, the shaft friction, f, in lb/ft2
(kPa) at any point along the pile may be calculated by the
equation.
f = α c
(6.4.2-1)
where
α = a dimensionless factor,
c = undrained shear strength of the soil at the point 
in question.
The factor, α, can be computed by the equations:
α = 0.5 ψ–0.5 ψ ≤ 1.0
(6.4.2-2)
α = 0.5 ψ–0.25 ψ > 1.0

===== PAGE 4 =====
58
API  RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 2A-WSD
with the constraint that, α ≤ 1.0,
where
ψ = c/p´o for the point in question,
p´o = effective overburden pressure at the point in 
question lb/ft2 (kPa).
A discussion of appropriate methods for determining the
undrained shear strength, c, and effective overburden pres-
sure, p´o, including the effects of various sampling and testing
procedures is included in the commentary. For underconsoli-
dated clays (clays with excess pore pressures undergoing
active consolidation), α, can usually be taken as 1.0. Due to
the lack of pile load tests in soils having c/p´o ratios greater
than three, equation 6.4.2-2 should be applied with some
engineering judgment for high c/p´o values. Similar judgment
should be applied for deep penetrating piles in soils with high
undrained shear strength, c, where the computed shaft fric-
tions, f, using equation 6.4.2-1 above, are generally higher
than previously speciﬁed in RP 2A.
For very long piles some reduction in capacity may be war-
ranted, particularly where the shaft friction may degrade to
some lesser residual value on continued displacement. This
effect is discussed in more detail in the commentary.
Alternative means of determining pile capacity that are
based on sound engineering principles and are consistent with
industry experience are permissible. A more detailed discus-
sion of alternate prediction methods is included in the com-
mentary.
For piles end bearing in cohesive soils, the unit end bearing
q, in lbs/ft2 (kPa), may be computed by the equation
q = 9c
(6.4.2-3)
The shaft friction, f, acts on both the inside and outside of
the pile. The total resistance is the sum of: the external shaft
friction; the end bearing on the pile wall annulus; the total
internal shaft friction or the end bearing of the plug, which-
ever is less. For piles considered to be plugged, the bearing
pressure may be assumed to act over the entire cross section
of the pile. For unplugged piles, the bearing pressure acts on
the pile wall annulus only. Whether a pile is considered
plugged or unplugged may be based on static calculations.
For example, a pile could be driven in an unplugged condition
but act plugged under static loading.
For piles driven in undersized drilled holes, piles jetted in
place, or piles drilled and grouted in place the selection of
shaft friction values should take into account the soil distur-
bance resulting from installation. In general f should not
exceed values for driven piles; however, in some cases for
drilled and grouted piles in overconsolidated clay, f may
exceed these values. In determining f for drilled and grouted
piles, the strength of the soil-grout interface, including poten-
tial effects of drilling mud, should be considered. A further
check should be made of the allowable bond stress between
the pile steel and the grout as recommended in Section 7.4.3.
For further discussion refer to “State of the Art: Ultimate
Axial Capacity of Grouted Piles” by Kraft and Lyons, OTC
2081, May, 1974.
In layered soils, shaft friction values, f, in the cohesive lay-
ers should be as given in Eq. (6.4.2-1). End bearing values for
piles tipped in cohesive layers with adjacent weaker layers
may be as given in Eq. (6.4.2-3), assuming that the pile
achieves penetration of two to three diameters or more into
the layer in question and the tip is approximately three diame-
ters above the bottom of the layer to preclude punch through.
Where these distances are not achieved, some modiﬁcation in
the end bearing resistance may be necessary. Where adjacent
layers are of comparable strength to the layer of interest, the
proximity of the pile tip to the interface is not a concern.
6.4.3
Shaft Friction and End Bearing in 
Cohesionless Soils
For pipe piles in cohesionless soils, the shaft friction, f, in
lb/ft2 (kPa) may be calculated by the equation:
f = Kpo tan δ
(6.4.3-1)
where
K = coefﬁcient of lateral earth pressure (ratio of hori-
zontal to vertical normal effective stress),
po = effective overburden pressure lb/ft2 (kPa) at the 
point in question,
δ = friction angle between the soil and pile wall.
For open-ended pipe piles driven unplugged, it is usually
appropriate to assume K as 0.8 for both tension and compres-
sion loadings. Values of K for full displacement piles
(plugged or closed end) may be assumed to be 1.0. Table
6.4.3-1 may be used for selection of δ if other data are not
available. For long piles f may not indeﬁnitely increase lin-
early with the overburden pressure as implied by Eq. 6.4.3-1.
In such cases it may be appropriate to limit f to the values
given in Table 6.4.3-1.
For piles end bearing in cohesionless soils the unit end
bearing q in lb/ft2 (kPa) may be computed by the equation
q = poNq
(6.4.3-2)
where
po = effective overburden pressure lb/ft2 (kPa) at the 
pile tip,
Nq = dimensionless bearing capacity factor.

===== PAGE 5 =====
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR PLANNING, DESIGNING AND CONSTRUCTING FIXED OFFSHORE PLATFORMS—WORKING STRESS DESIGN
59
Recommended values of Nq are presented in Table 6.4.3-1.
The shaft friction, f, acts on both the inside and outside of the
piles. However, the total resistance in excess of the external
shaft friction plus annular end bearing is the total internal
shaft friction or the end bearing of the plug, whichever is less.
For piles considered to be plugged the bearing pressure may
be assumed to act over the entire cross section of the pile. For
unplugged piles the bearing pressure acts on the pile annulus
only. Whether a pile is considered to be plugged or unplugged
may be based on static calculations. For example, a pile could
be driven in an unplugged condition but act plugged under
static loading.
Load test data for piles in sand (see “Comparison of Mea-
sured and Axial Load Capacities of Steel Pipe Piles in Sand
with Capacities Calculated Using the 1986 API RP2A Stan-
dard,” Final Report to API, Dec. 1987, by R. E. Olson) indi-
cate that variability in capacity predictions may exceed those
for piles in clay. Other data (see Toolan and Ims (1988)) (1)
suggest that for piles in loose sands and long piles (> 50 m) in
tension the method may be less conservative than for com-
pression piles in medium dense to dense sands. Therefore, in
unfamiliar situations, the designer may want to account for
this uncertainty through a selection of conservative design
parameters and/or safety factors. This may be especially
important where load shedding subsequent to peak load
development leading to an abrupt (brittle) failure may occur
such as the case for short piles under tension loading.
For soils that do not fall within the ranges of soil density
and description given in Table 6.4.3-1, or for materials with
unusually weak grains or compressible structures, Table
6.4.3-1 may not be appropriate for selection of design param-
eters. For example, very loose silts or soils containing large
amounts of mica or volcanic grains may require special labo-
ratory or ﬁeld tests for selection of design parameters. Of par-
ticular importance are sands containing calcium carbonate
which are found extensively in many areas of the oceans.
Available data suggest that driven piles in these soils may
have substantially lower design strength parameters than
given in Table 6.4.3-1. Drilled and grouted piles in carbonate
sands, however, may have signiﬁcantly higher capacities than
driven piles and have been used successfully in many carbon-
ate areas. The characteristics of carbonate sands are highly
variable and local experience should dictate the design
parameters selected. For example, available qualitative data
Table 6.4.3-1—Design Parameters for Cohesionless Siliceous Soil*
Density
Soil Description
Soil-Pile 
Friction Angle, 
δ Degrees
Limiting Skin 
Friction Values 
kips/ft2 (kPa)
Nq
Limiting Unit End 
Bearing Values 
kips/ft2 (MPa)
Very Loose
Sand
15
1.0 (47.8)
8
40 (1.9)
Loose
Sand-Silt**
Medium
Silt
Loose
Sand
20
1.4 (67.0)
12
60 (2.9)
Medium
Sand-Silt**
Dense
Silt
Medium
Sand
25
1.7 (81.3)
20
100 (4.8)
Dense
Sand-Silt**
Dense
Sand
30
2.0 (95.7)
40
200 (9.6)
Very Dense
Sand-Silt**
Dense
Gravel
35
2.4 (114.8)
50
250 (12.0)
Very Dense
Sand
*The parameters listed in this table are intended as guidelines only. Where detailed information such as in situ cone tests, strength tests on high 
quality samples, model tests, or pile driving performance is available, other values may be justiﬁed.
**Sand-Silt includes those soils with signiﬁcant fractions of both sand and silt. Strength values generally increase with increasing sand fractions 
and decrease with increasing silt fractions.

===== PAGE 6 =====
60
API  RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 2A-WSD
suggest that capacity is improved in carbonate soils of high
densities and higher quartz contents. Cementation may
increase end bearing capacity, but result in a loss of lateral
pressure and a corresponding decrease in frictional capacity.
These materials are discussed further in the Commentary.
For piles driven in undersized drilled or jetted holes in
cohesionless soils the values of f and q should be determined
by some reliable method that accounts for the amount of soil
disturbance due to installation but they should not exceed val-
ues for driven piles. Except in unusual soil types such as
described above, the values of f and q in Table 6.4.3-1 may be
used for drilled and grouted piles, with consideration given to
the strength of the soil grout interface.
In layered soils shaft friction values, f, in the cohesionless
layers should be as outlined in Table 6.4.3-1. End bearing val-
ues for piles tipped in cohesionless layers with adjacent soft
layers may also be taken from Table 6.4.3-1, assuming that
the pile achieves penetration of two to three diameters or
more into the cohesionless layer, and the tip is approximately
three diameters above the bottom of the layer to preclude
punch through. Where these distances are not achieved, some
modiﬁcation in the tabulated values may be necessary. Where
adjacent layers are of comparable strength to the layer of
interest, the proximity of the pile tip to the interface is not a
concern.
6.4.4
Skin Friction and End Bearing of Grouted 
Piles in Rock
The unit skin friction of grouted piles in jetted or drilled
holes in rock should not exceed the triaxial shear strength of
the rock or grout, but in general should be much less than this
value based on the amount of reduced shear strength from
installation. For example the strength of dry compacted shale
may be greatly reduced when exposed to water from jetting
or drilling. The sidewall of the hole may develop a layer of
slaked mud or clay which will never regain the strength of the
rock. The limiting value for this type pile may be the allow-
able bond stress between the pile steel and the grout as rec-
ommended in 7.4.3.
The end bearing capacity of the rock should be determined
from the triaxial shear strength of the rock and an appropriate
bearing capacity factor based on sound engineering practice
for the rock materials but should not exceed 100 tons per
square foot (9.58 MPa).
6.5
PILE CAPACITY FOR AXIAL PULLOUT LOADS
The ultimate pile pullout capacity may be equal to or less
than but should not exceed Qf, the total skin friction resis-
tance. The effective weight of the pile including hydrostatic
uplift and the soil plug shall be considered in the analysis to
determine the ultimate pullout capacity. For clay, f should be
the same as stated in 6.4.2. For sand and silt, f should be com-
puted according to 6.4.3.
For rock, f should be the same as stated in Section 6.4.4.
The allowable pullout capacity should be determined by
applying the factors of safety in 6.3.4 to the ultimate pullout
capacity.
6.6
AXIAL PILE PERFORMANCE
6.6.1
Static Load-Deﬂection Behavior
Piling axial deﬂections should be within acceptable ser-
viceability limits and these deﬂections should be compatible
with the structural forces and movements. An analytical
method for determining axial pile performance is provided in
Computer Predictions of Axially Loaded Piles with Non-lin-
ear Supports, by P. T. Meyer, et al., OTC 2186, May 1975.
This method makes use of axial pile shear transition vs. local
pile deﬂection (t-z) curves to model the axial support pro-
vided by the soil along the size of the pile. An additional (Q-
z) curve is used to model the tip and bearing vs. the deﬂection
response. Methods for constructing t-z and Q-z curves are
given in Section 6.7. Pile response is affected by load direc-
tions, load types, load rates, loading sequence installation
technique, soil type, axial pile stiffness and other parameters.
Some of these effects for cohesive soils have been
observed in both laboratory and ﬁeld tests.
In some circumstances, i.e., for soils that exhibit strain-
softening behavior and/or where the piles are axially ﬂexible,
the actual capacity of the pile may be less than that given by
Eq. 6.4.1-1. In these cases an explicit consideration of these
effects on ultimate axial capacity may be warranted. Note that
other factors such as increased axial capacity under loading
rates associated with storm waves may counteract the above
effects. For more information see Section 6.2.2, its commen-
tary, as well as “Effects of Cyclic Loading and Pile Flexibility
on Axial Pile Capacities in Clay” by T. W. Dunnavant, E. C.
Clukey and J. D. Murff, OTC 6374, May 1990.
6.6.2
Cyclic Response
Unusual pile loading conditions or limitations on design
pile penetrations may warrant detailed consideration of cyclic
loading effects.
Cyclic loadings (including inertial loadings) developed by
environmental conditions such as storm waves and earth-
quakes can have two potentially counteractive effects on the
static axial capacity. Repetitive loadings can cause a tempo-
rary or permanent decrease in load-carrying resistance, and/or
an accumulation of deformation. Rapidly applied loadings
can cause an increase in load-carrying resistance and/or stiff-
ness of the pile. Very slowly applied loadings can cause a
decrease in load-carrying resistance and/or stiffness of the
pile. The resultant inﬂuence of cyclic loadings will be a func-
tion of the combined effects of the magnitudes, cycles, and
rates of applied pile loads, the structural characteristics of the

===== PAGE 7 =====
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR PLANNING, DESIGNING AND CONSTRUCTING FIXED OFFSHORE PLATFORMS—WORKING STRESS DESIGN
61
pile, the types of soils, and the factors of safety used in design
of the piles.
The design pile penetration should be sufﬁcient to develop
an effective pile capacity to resist the design static and cyclic
loadings as discussed in 6.3.4.
The design pile penetration can be conﬁrmed by perform-
ing pile response analyses of the pile-soil system subjected to
static and cyclic loadings. Analytical methods to perform
such analyses are described in the commentary to this Sec-
tion. The pile-soil resistance-displacement t-z, Q-z character-
izations are discussed in Section 6.7.
6.6.3
Overall Pile Response Analyses
When any of the above effects are explicitly considered in
pile response analysis, the design static and cyclic loadings
should be imposed on the pile top and the resistance-displace-
ments of the pile determined. At the completion of the design
loadings, the maximum pile resistance and displacement
should be determined. Pile deformations should meet struc-
ture serviceability requirements. The total pile resistance after
the design loadings should meet the requirements of 6.3.4.
6.7
SOIL REACTION FOR AXIALLY LOADED 
PILES
6.7.1
General
The pile foundation should be designed to resist the static
and cyclic axial loads. The axial resistance of the soil is pro-
vided by a combination of axial soil-pile adhesion or load
transfer along the sides of the pile and end bearing resistance
at the pile tip. The plotted relationship between mobilized
soil-pile shear transfer and local pile deﬂection at any depth is
described using a t-z curve. Similarly, the relationship
between mobilized end bearing resistance and axial tip
deﬂection is described using a Q-z curve.
6.7.2
Axial Load Transfer (t-z) Curves
Various empirical and theoretical methods are available
for developing curves for axial load transfer and pile dis-
placement, (t-z) curves. Theoretical curves described by
Kraft, et al. (1981) may be constructed. Empirical t-z curves
based on the results of model and full-scale pile load tests
may follow the procedures in clay soils described by Cole
and Reese (1966) or granular soils by Coyle, H.M. and
Suliaman, I.H. Skin Friction for Steel Piles in Sand, Journal
of the Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, Proceedings
of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 93, No.
SM6, November, 1967, p. 261–278. Additional curves for
clays and sands are provided by Vijayvergiya, V.N., Load
Movement Characteristics of Piles, Proceedings of the Ports
‘77 Conference, American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol.
II, p. 269–284.
Load deﬂection relationships for grouted piles are dis-
cussed in Criteria for Design of Axially Loaded Drilled
Shafts, by L. C. Reese and M. O’Neill, Center for Highway
Research Report, University of Texas, August 1971. Curves
developed from pile load tests in representative soil proﬁles
or based on laboratory soil tests that model pile installation
may also be justiﬁed. Other information may be used, pro-
vided such information can be shown to result in adequate
safeguards against excessive deﬂection and rotation.
In the absence of more deﬁnitive criteria, the following t-z
curves are recommended for non-carbonate soils. The recom-
mended curves are shown in Figure 6.7.2-1.
where
t = local pile deﬂection, in. (mm),
D = pile diameter, in. (mm),
t = mobilized soil pile adhesion, lb/ft2 (kPa),
tmax = maximum soil pile adhesion or unit skin friction 
capacity computed according to Section 6.4, lb/ft2 
(kPa).
The shape of the t-z curve at displacements greater than
zmax as shown in Figure 6.7.2-1 should be carefully consid-
ered. Values of the residual adhesion ratio tres/tmax at the axial
pile displacement at which it occurs (zres) are a function of
soil stress-strain behavior, stress history, pipe installation
method, pile load sequence and other factors.
The value of tres/tmax can range from 0.70 to 0.90. Labora-
tory, in situ or model pile tests can provide valuable informa-
tion for determining values of tres/tmax and zres for various
soils. For additional information see the listed references at
the beginning of 6.7.2.
Clays
t/D
t/tmax
0.0016
0.30
0.0031
0.50
0.0057
0.75
0.0080
0.90
0.0100
1.00
0.0200
0.70 to 0.90
∞
0.70 to 0.90
Sands
t (in.)
t/tmax
0.000
0.00
0.100
1.00
∞
1.00

===== PAGE 8 =====
62
API  RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 2A-WSD
Figure 6.7.2-1—Typical Axial Pile Load Transfer-Displacement (t-z) Curves
1.0
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
∞
0.8
0.6
Z/D
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
∞
Z, inches
0.4
t/tmax
0.2
0
tRES = 0.9 tmax 
tmax = f
tRES = 0.7 tmax 
Range of tRES 
for clays
Clay:
Sand:
Clay
Sand
Z/D
t/tmax
Z, inch
t/tmax
0.00
0.0016
0.0031
0.0057
0.0080
0.0100
0.0200
   ∞
0.00
0.30
0.50
0.75
0.90
1.00
0.70 to 0.90
0.70 to 0.90
0.00
0.10
∞
0.00
1.00
1.00

===== PAGE 9 =====
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR PLANNING, DESIGNING AND CONSTRUCTING FIXED OFFSHORE PLATFORMS—WORKING STRESS DESIGN
63
6.7.3
Tip Load—Displacement Curve
The end bearing or tip load capacity should be determined
as described in 6.4.2 and 6.4.3. However, relatively large pile
tip movements are required to mobilize the full end bearing
resistance. A pile tip displacement up to 10 percent of the pile
diameter may be required for full mobilization in both sand
and clay soils. In the absence of more deﬁnitive criteria the
following curve is recommended for both sands and clays.
where
z = axial tip deﬂection, in. (mm),
D = pile diameter, in. (mm),
Q = mobilized end bearing capacity, lb (KN).
Qp = total end bearing, lb (KN), computed according 
to Section 6.4.
The recommended curve is shown in Figure 6.7.3-1.
6.8
SOIL REACTION FOR LATERALLY-LOADED 
PILES
6.8.1
General
The pile foundation should be designed to sustain lateral
loads, whether static or cyclic. Additionally, the designer
should consider overload cases in which the design lateral
loads on the platform foundation are increased by an appro-
priate safety factor. The designer should satisfy himself that
the overall structural foundation system will not fail under the
overloads. The lateral resistance of the soil near the surface is
signiﬁcant to pile design, and the effects on this resistance of
scour and soil disturbance during pile installation should be
considered. Generally, under lateral loading, clay soils behave
as a plastic material which makes it necessary to relate pile-
soil deformation to soil resistance. To facilitate this proce-
dure, lateral soil resistance deﬂection (p-y) curves should be
constructed using stress-strain data from laboratory soil sam-
ples. The ordinate for these curves is soil resistance, p, and
the abscissa is soil deﬂection, y. By iterative procedures, a
compatible set of load-deﬂection values for the pile-soil sys-
tem can be developed.
For a more detailed study of the construction of p-y curves
refer to the following publications.
Soft Clay: OTC 1204, Correlations for Design of Laterally
Loaded Piles in Soft Clay, by H. Matlock, April 1970.
z/D
Q/Qp
0.002
0.25
0.013
0.50
0.042
0.75
0.073
0.90
0.100
1.00
z/D
t/tmax
0.002
0.013
0.042
0.073
0.100
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
1.00
Q/Qp = 1.0
z/D
zu = 0.10 x Pile Diameter (D)
Figure 6.7.3-1—Pile Tip-Load-Displacement (Q-z) curve
